---
layout: post
author:
- Tejas Sanap
title: Costs related to Inventory
---

A lot of people will very often fail to realise how much thought needs
to be put when deciding how much inventory or raw material needs to be
purchased. The why of the why is it so difficult, is threefold:

1.  We must take into account the forecasted demand (more about this in
    another blog post).

2.  It ties up useful capital, which in case of emergencies, might turn
    out to be very bad.

3.  The cost of purchasing inventory includes much more than just what
    you pay to the supplier.

We know, all about how fickle the demands in markets are, thus we must
always have some extra raw materials, in case, more people than our
guesstimate show up. The case where we run out of raw material is called
as **stock out**. But, we don't want too much of raw material, either,
otherwise we will have carry and take care of stuff that we don't need
(as of, yet).

Thus, in order to, completely understand the purchase process we need to
know:

1.  What is the Total Relevant Cost (TRC) when purchasing some
    inventory?

2.  How do the costs that make up the TRC affect our available capital?

3.  How to find the right balance between TRC and market demand?

Case Study
==========

Say our friend, *Pablo*, who owns a *shwarma*[^1] truck (as a side
business) wants to **stock up** for an upcoming baseball game between
two local teams on **Sunday**. Pablo has a regular day job as a
construction worker. His **daily wage is \$50**.

Pablo sits down at a table and makes a quick list of the stuff that he
will have to buy:

1.  Meat

2.  Oil

3.  Spices and herbs

4.  Bread

5.  Fresh vegetables

6.  Cooking gas (or, as we call it, LPG)

He knows that the best fresh meat, he can buy, is on the other side of
the town, which means he will have to drive down there through heavy
traffic and potentially spend an entire afternoon, doing that. So, he
decides to send his assistant chef (a.k.a., his **nephew**, who gets
paid **\$5 an hour**) to get that meat. Pablo guesstimates that there
will be a large crowd at the game, so he decides to buy **twice the
amount of meat** that he would buy on a regular day. He also decides to
buy **five oil cans** of the best authentic Arabian Olive oil he can
find.[^2]. He has known for a while that his weakly-related cousin,
Santiago, living in another state, grows his own organic **herbs**, that
are supplied to all the best restaurants. He calls up Santiago and asks
him about his herbs and how much they would cost him. Santiago says that
it would cost him **\$5 to place an order** and **\$10 to get it
delivered** to him and that based on Pablo's location, the **shipping
time** would be **2 days**. So, almost **5 days** before the game Pablo
orders his special organic herbs.

After checking out the deep freezer in his house, Pablo realises that he
doesn't have enough place to store the meat and vegetables. He also
knows from experience that it is risky to wait until the last moment to
buy those two crucial ingredients. So, Pablo asks the grocery store near
the baseball playfield (where the match will be held) if he could store
his meat for him. The store owner agrees but, asks for **\$10 per day of
storage**. As for the vegetables, he pays his local vegetable vendor
**\$100, in advance** to reserve his lot of the freshest veggies.

**Preparing** all the **lists**, **calculating** how much it would
**cost** him and **meeting people** to make **arrangements**, takes a
**lot of time**, because of which Pablo is unable to go to his **daily
job for two days**. The game is now two days away, and Pablo decides
that it is time to buy and store the meat. But, he can't afford missing
out on his daily job anymore, so he **sends his assistant-chef** (a.k.a,
his nephew) to get the meat and oil. Since it's a lot of stuff to carry
around, Pablo borrows his neighbour's minivan, early in the morning. He
gives the nephew **\$10 for lunch** and **\$50 for gasoline** to fill in
the minivan. Pablo calls the grocery store owner to make sure their deal
is still in effect and an affirmative reply, the deep freezer has been
emptied to store his meat, and Pablo is now on the clock.

Right at noon, the nephew begins his errand run. Due to an accident on
the highway, he is stuck in traffic for hours and reaches the meat store
late, only to find that it is closed for some reason. The nephew on
making some enquiries finds out that the store will be open tomorrow.
So, the nephew goes to his next stop to get the oil and brings it home,
by **7 PM**. On the **next day**, the nephew leaves early in the
morning(**8 AM**), to get the meat. On reaching the meat store, he finds
out that it will cost him **\$5 extra for packaging** that much meat.
This trip costs Pablo another **\$50 for gasoline**. The nephew drops
off the meat at the grocery store on his way back, he gets home **at
noon** and helps Pablo with sorting and preparing the spices for game
day until **5 in the evening**.

Everything goes smoothly, game day is here. But, that means Pablo can't
go to his daily job today. Pablo and his nephew, leave home at **7 AM**
and go to the grocery store. The store owner charges him for **3 days**,
even though the meat wasn't actually there on the first day and was
removed from the deep freezer in the morning, on the third day. This
annoys Pablo, but he doesn't want a bad start to his day, so he just
lets it go.

The day goes on, Pablo and his nephew are occupied all day. The local
teams play a good game. It was a good day for Pablo, too. His
guesstimate that there would be a lot of crowd, proves to be correct,
and he has depleted his inventory almost completely.

Analysis of Case Study
======================

Let's break down the expenses Pablo has made and try to find out which
of those are related to the raw material he purchased.

Expenses related to inventory can be split in the following manner.

Let's put all the costs that Pablo has incurred in a tabular format.

[^1]: Shawarma is a Middle Eastern meat preparation based on the döner
    kebab of Ottoman Turkey. Originally made of lamb or mutton, today's
    shawarma may also be chicken, turkey, beef, or veal, cut in thin
    slices and stacked in a cone-like shape on a vertical rotisserie.

[^2]: I have no idea if something like this even exists.
